Lesson 9

9.1 Prepositions with pronominal suffixes.

A pronominal object of a preposition is expressed by means of a suffixed form of the pronoun. The preposition itself assumes a prepronominal form which must be learned with each preposition. For example, the preposition Ⲉ becomes ⲈⲢⲞ⸗ before pronominal suffixes. The mark ⸗ is a convention used in Coptic grammars to indicate any form to which a pronominal suffix is to be added. The prepronominal forms of the prepositions introduced thus far are as follows:

Ⲛ̄		Ⲙ̄ⲘⲞ⸗
ϨⲚ̄		Ⲛ̄ϨⲎⲦ⸗
ϨⲀ		ϨⲀⲢⲞ⸗
ϨⲒ		ϨⲒⲰ(Ⲱ)⸗
ⲘⲚ̄		ⲚⲘ̄ⲘⲀ⸗
ϢⲀ		ϢⲀⲢⲞ⸗
Ⲉ 		ⲈⲢⲞ⸗
ϨⲒϪⲚ̄	ϨⲒϪⲰ⸗
ⲈϪⲚ̄	ⲈϪⲰ⸗
ϨⲒⲦⲚ̄	ϨⲒⲦⲞⲞⲦ⸗
Ⲛ̄ⲤⲀ	Ⲛ̄ⲤⲰ⸗
ϨⲒⲢⲚ̄	ϨⲒⲢⲰ⸗
ⲈⲢⲚ̄	ⲈⲢⲰ⸗
ⲚⲀϨⲢⲚ̄	ⲚⲀϨⲢⲀ⸗
ϨⲀϨⲦⲚ̄	ϨⲀϨⲦⲎ⸗
ⲞⲨⲂⲈ	ⲞⲨⲂⲎ⸗
ⲈⲦⲂⲈ	ⲈⲦⲂⲎⲎⲦ⸗

Because the variety exhibited by the prepronomial forms is at first puzzling, the following comments may be of some help:

1) In ⲈⲢⲞ⸗ and ϨⲀⲢⲞ⸗ the final syllable -ⲢⲞ⸗ is an original part of the preposition; it was lost in the normal prenominal form. ϢⲀⲢⲞ⸗ is on analogy with these.

2) Ⲛ̄ϨⲎⲦ⸗ and ϨⲒⲰ⸗ were originally a noun meaning "interior" (cf. the ϨⲞⲨⲚ of ⲈϨⲞⲨⲚ); ϨⲒ was a simple preposition.

3) ϨⲒϪⲰ⸗ and ⲈϪⲰ⸗ are ϨⲒ and Ⲉ with the noun ϪⲰ⸗ (head, top); the noun is reduced to -Ϫ- in ϨⲒϪⲚ̄ and ⲈϪⲚ̄, which also contain the genitival Ⲛ̄.

4) ϨⲒⲢⲰ⸗ and ⲈⲢⲰ⸗ are ϨⲒ and Ⲉ with the noun ⲢⲰ⸗ mouth, door; the latter is reduced to Ⲣ in ϨⲒⲢⲚ̄ and ⲈⲢⲚ̄, with genitival Ⲛ̄.

5) ϨⲒⲦⲞⲞⲦ⸗ is ϨⲒ plus the noun ⲦⲞⲞⲦ⸗ (hand); the latter is reduced to -Ⲧ- in ϨⲒⲦⲚ̄, with genitival Ⲛ̄.

6) ⲚⲀϨⲢⲀ⸗ contains the noun ϨⲢⲀ⸗ (face). The initial element is obscure. ⲚⲀϨⲢⲚ̄ also contains the genitival Ⲛ̄.

7) ϨⲀϨⲦⲎ⸗ consists of ϨⲀ plus the noun ϨⲦⲎ⸗ (heart, breast), reduced to -ϨⲦ- with the genitival Ⲛ̄ in ϨⲀϨⲦⲚ̄.

The nouns contained in these expressions will be dealt with in a later lesson.

Typical inflections of these prepositions are as follows:

ⲉⲣⲟⲓ				to me
ⲉⲣⲟⲕ				to you (m.s.)
ⲉⲣⲟ 				to you (f.s.)
ⲉⲣⲟϥ				to him
ⲉⲣⲟⲥ				to her

ⲉⲣⲟⲛ 			to us
ⲉⲣⲱⲧⲛ̄ 			to you (pl.)

ⲉⲣⲟⲟⲩ 			to them

ⲛⲙ̄ⲙⲁⲓ 			with me
ⲛⲙ̄ⲙⲁⲕ 			etc.
ⲛⲙ̄ⲙⲉ
ⲛⲙ̄ⲙⲁϥ
ⲛⲙ̄ⲙⲁⲥ

ⲛⲙ̄ⲙⲁⲛ
ⲛⲙ̄ⲙⲛⲧⲛ̄
ⲛⲙ̄ⲙⲁⲩ

ⲛ̄ϩⲏⲧ 			in me
ⲛ̄ϩⲏⲧⲕ̄ 			etc.
ⲛ̄ϩⲏⲧⲉ
ⲛ̄ϩⲏⲧϥ̄
ⲛ̄ϩⲏⲧⲥ̄

ⲛ̄ϩⲏⲧⲛ̄
ⲛ̄ϩⲏⲧ-ⲧⲏⲩⲧⲛ
ⲛ̄ϩⲏⲧⲟⲩ

ⲟⲩⲃⲏⲓ 			against me
ⲟⲩⲃⲏⲕ 			etc.
ⲟⲩⲃⲏⲧⲉ
ⲟⲩⲃⲏϥ
ⲟⲩⲃⲏⲥ

ⲟⲩⲃⲏⲛ
ⲟⲩⲃⲉ-ⲧⲏⲩⲧⲛ
ⲟⲩⲃⲏⲩ

ⲉⲧⲃⲏⲏⲧ 			because of me
ⲉⲧⲃⲏⲏⲧⲕ̄ 		etc.
ⲉⲧⲃⲏⲏⲧⲉ
ⲉⲧⲃⲏⲏⲧϥ̄
ⲉⲧⲃⲏⲏⲧⲥ̄

ⲉⲧⲃⲏⲏⲧⲛ̄
ⲉⲧⲃⲉ-ⲧⲏⲩⲧⲛ̄
ⲉⲧⲃⲏⲏⲧⲟⲩ

The prepronominal form of ϩⲓ appears as both ϩⲓⲱ⸗ and ϩⲓⲱⲱ⸗; typical forms are

ϩⲓⲱⲱⲧ
ϩⲓⲱⲱⲕ ϩⲓⲱⲕ
ϩⲓⲱⲱⲧⲉ
ϩⲓⲱⲱϥ ϩⲓⲱϥ
ϩⲓⲱⲱⲥ ϩⲓⲱⲥ

ϩⲓⲱⲱⲏ ϩⲓⲱⲏ
ϩⲓ-ⲧⲏⲩⲧⲛ̄
ϩⲓⲱⲟⲩ

The following details on the forms of suffixed pronouns in general should be noted for future reference:

1) The 1st pers. sing. suffix appears as ⲓ after a single vowel, as zero (nothing) after -ⲧ⸗, and as ⲧ elsewhere.

2) The suffix of the 2nd pers. fem. sing. appears as zero after a single vowel other than -ⲁ⸗, as -ⲉ in place of a single -ⲁ⸗, as -ⲉ after -ⲧ⸗ and as -ⲧⲉ elsewhere.

3) The suffix of the 2nd pers. pl. appears as -ⲧⲛ̄ after single -ⲟ⸗, -ⲁ⸗, -ⲱ⸗, with the change of -ⲟ⸗ to -ⲱ⸗ and -ⲁ⸗ to -ⲏ⸗. After -ⲧ⸗ one uses -ⲧⲏⲩⲧⲛ̄. Elsewhere -ⲧⲏⲩⲧⲛ̄ is usually added to the prenominal form of the preposition or other form in question, as in ϩⲁϩⲧⲛ̄-ⲧⲏⲩⲧⲛ̄.
